  NSMUX TRANSLATOR

  WHAT'S THIS?
  nsmux is a GNU/Hurd translator that mirrors the contents of the
directory it is given and provides the possibility to apply
namespace-based translator selection to its contents.

  WHAT'S NAMESPACE-BASED TRANSLATOR SELECTION?
  Namespace-based translator selection is a special technique of
applying translators without using the 'settrans' command. The main
idea is using special file names. For example, if you want to the
contents of file 'file' translated by translator 'x', you have to just
ask for 'file,,x'. You can also obtain the untranslated version of the
node 'file' using the following syntax: 'file,,0'. Note how we avoid
the usage of 'settrans', and, at the same time, maintain the
advantages of translator-based approach.
  You can also filter the translator stack: suppose you have a file
'file' translated by translators 'x', 'u', 'y', and 'z'. In most
cases, you can request for 'file,,-u', and you will be provided with
the node 'file' translated by 'x' only (the only translator which
comes before 'u'). As usual, this syntax can be equally applied to
directories.
  Note that the functionality described in the previous paragraph is
not hard-coded in the namespace proxy and depends on the decision of
the special filtering translator '-u'.

  WHAT'S IT FOR?
  Namespace-based translator selection greatly facilitates the work
with translators and therefore contributes to enlargening of their
field of applicability. On the other hand, applying translators to a
whole directory tree directly increases the capabilities of simple
translators (libtrivfs based).

  AUTHOR OF THE IDEA

Olaf Buddenhagen (antrik)

  DEVELOPER
Sergiu Ivanov <unlimitedscolobb@gmail.com>
